
[NOTE: With the newer kernels now used by Slackware you shouldn't need to
       worry about this, but I'm including it in case anyone needs to run an
       earlier kernel (like 1.1.18) on an EIDE drive  - Pat ]


                Everything I Know About Linux and EIDE
                --------------------------------------


Introduction
------------

It is possible to use Linux on a large EIDE drive with no restrictions
on where anything resides.  I only deal with DOS and Linux here, but
the approach I suggest should be compatible with other operating
systems as well.

I presently use version 1.0.9 of the kernel, but everything here
applies to kernels at least through 1.1.34.  Sometime in the future,
Linux will probably support EIDE gracefully and transparently, at
which point all of this will be moot.  Everything I suggest, however,
should continue to work with these future kernels, although most of it
will become unnecessary.


Background and Terminology
--------------------------

Sectors on an ATA (IDE) drive are 512 bytes long.  There are two ways
to address sectors.  Logical Block Address (LBA) form, or logical
form, numbers the sectors linearly starting with 0.
Cylinder-Head-Sector (CHS) form, or physical form, addresses each
sector with a (cylinder, head, sector) triplet.  To convert addresses
from logical to physical form, it is necessary to know how many heads
per cylinder and how many sectors per head the drive has.  If the
total number of cylinders is known as well, the size of the drive can
be determined.  The number of cylinders, heads per cylinder ("heads"),
and sectors per head ("sectors") is called the "disk geometry".

Old controllers and BIOSes require sectors to be addressed in physical
form; all controllers and BIOSes allow sectors to be addressed in
physical form.  Linux uses logical addresses everywhere except at the
lowest possible level, when it translates to physical form to talk to
the controller.  Linux does not use the BIOS for anything except to
determine the disk geometry.

The partition table records the start and end of each partition in
*both* logical and physical form.  Both DOS fdisk and Linux fdisk
expect these values to agree.  DOS fdisk obtains the disk geometry by
querying the BIOS; Linux fdisk obtains the geometry by querying the
kernel.

Now for the fun part.  MS-DOS and the BIOS interface use a 10-bit
field to hold the cylinder number, so they only allow cylinders 0-1023
to be accessed.  This is not sufficient for modern drives, which tend
to have 63 sectors/head, 16 heads/cylinder, and many cylinders.  The
"solution" is a complete hack: An EIDE BIOS will *lie* when queried
for the disk geometry by halving (or quartering) the number of
cylinders and doubling (or quadrupling) the number of heads.  Then
whenever a physically addressed I/O request arrives, the BIOS will
assume the request is based on the bogus disk geometry, and will
convert it appropriately to talk to the controller.  This process is
called "address translation".


The Problem
-----------

When the Linux kernel queries the BIOS (actually, it just reads the
CMOS settings) to determine the disk geometry, it will get the bogus
values which claim more than 16 heads.  Linux knows that this is
impossible, so the code in hd.c gives up and skips the drive.  (Note
that even though the BIOS is reporting a bogus geometry, requests to
the controller still need to be based on the real geometry.  Thus
merely eliminating the test in hd.c won't work.)


The Wrong Solution
------------------

One fix is to use the BIOS "setup" program to turn off address
translation completely.  You may have to manually set the
cylinder/head/sector values to the real geometry, or it may be
possible to simply turn off the translation, depending on how your
setup works.

Then you can repartition your drive with DOS and/or Linux fdisk,
install both operating systems, and things will work, provided you
observe certain restrictions.

The problem is that the BIOS still can't be used to access cylinders
above 1023.  So all of your DOS partitions will have to be below that
limit, as will anything which needs to be accessed through the BIOS.
For example, LILO uses the BIOS to do its dirty work; so if you want
to use LILO to boot Linux, you will have to make sure the kernel
(read: entire root partition) lies below the 1024 cylinder limit.
Linux itself, however, will happily access the entire drive.


The Right Solution
------------------

Restrictions are annoying, so we will avoid them.  This obviously
requires leaving address translation on and dealing with the remaining
problems in a different way.

To fix the kernel's problem, simply feed the real geometry to the
kernel with a boot-time option line.  You can do this from the LILO
boot prompt by typing "<image name> hd=<cylinders>,<heads>,<sectors>".
You can also have LILO feed the options automatically by using an
"append=" directive in your lilo.conf file.

Now the kernel will be able to recognize and access the drive, but
when a user mode program (e.g., fdisk or the LILO installer) queries
the kernel for the disk geometry, the kernel will return the real geometry,
not the bogus one.  So Linux fdisk (which queries the kernel) and DOS
fdisk (which queries the BIOS) will disagree about how the partition
table should look.  Also, the LILO installer will be computing
physical addresses which are incompatible with what the BIOS (and
therefore the LILO runtime) requires.

The fdisk problem is easy to fix:  Go to expert mode, and set the
number of cylinders and number of heads to the bogus (BIOS-compliant)
values.  Then edit the partition table and write it out, confident
that Linux fdisk and DOS fdisk are seeing eye to eye.

The LILO problem is just as easy to fix: Add the "linear" directive to
your lilo.conf file.  This will cause LILO to use logical addresses
instead of physical to store its data, forcing LILO to compute
physical addresses at run time instead of at install time.  This will
use the geometry supplied by the BIOS instead of that supplied by the
kernel, and everything will "just work".


Example / Summary
-----------------

I have a 1 Gig EIDE drive on which I recently installed Linux.  Here
is the procedure I used.

1) Ran setup and examined the (bogus) disk geometry.  It said 505
cylinders, 64 heads, 63 sectors.  More than 16 heads is impossible, so
the real values must be 2100 cylinders, 16 heads, 63 sectors.

2) Booted DOS boot disk, ran fdisk, created a DOS partition.

3) Booted Slackware boot disk.  Typed "ramdisk hd=2100,16,63" to boot
the kernel.  Ran Linux fdisk, typed "p" to see lots of errors, typed
"x" to access expert mode, set cylinders to 505, set heads to 64,
returned to normal mode, typed "p" to see my DOS partition and no
error messages.  Created partitions to heart's content.  Saved
partition table and rebooted from Slackware disk (not sure why I had
to do this).

4) Installed Slackware normally, creating an ordinary lilo.conf file.

5) Edited lilo.conf (in this case, /mnt/etc/lilo.conf) to add these
lines to the top:

append="hd=2100,16,63"
linear

6) Ran "lilo -r /mnt".  I expected to need the "-P ignore" option, but
didn't.  Go figure.

7) Installed DOS and Windows, much to my chagrin.


Good luck to all.

- Patrick LoPresti
  patl@lcs.mit.edu
